{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f30\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f31\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\f33\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f34\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f35\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f36\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\f37\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{
\s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 
\sbasedon0 \snext15 footnote text;}{\*\cs16 \additive \super \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}}{\info{\title  }{\author Dark Elf}{\operator DarkElf}{\creatim\yr2001\mo9\dy10\hr9\min35}{\revtim\yr2002\mo7\dy10\hr12\min2}{\version24}{\edmins156}{\nofpages14}
{\nofwords1183}{\nofchars6744}{\*\company Elf}{\nofcharsws8282}{\vern8247}}\paperw11906\paperh16838 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701
\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2
\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ Main}}}{\fs16  
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs28 S Invoice
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par Welcome to Simple Invoice the Invoicing software designed for small companies. This software has context sensitive help, simply open the screen you want information about and press <F1>.
\par 
\par This software is not designed for a multi-user environment.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\fs16 \page 
\par 
\par }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ Options}}}{\fs16  
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs28 Options
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par Enter all your company details here. Once all details have been entered click on the \lquote OK\rquote  button.
\par 
\par }{\b Invoice Comments}{ \endash  This message is displayed on bottom left part of the invoice, normally used to enter a disclaimer.
\par }{\b Estimate Comments }{\endash  This message is displayed on the bottom left part an estimate. 
\par }{\b Default Due Period }{\endash  The number of days after the invoice date the invoice becomes overdue.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Default Handling Charge -
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b Default VAT Percent}{ - Default value used when entering items on the invoice
\par }{\b Next Estimate Number}{ \endash  This number will be used when the next invoice is created.
\par }{\b Use Product Database}{ \endash  Enables the use of products, setup in product config section
\par }{\b Print 2 Copies }{\endash  When creating an invoice the computer will default to printing 2 copies.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24 Workstation Settings
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Invoice Number Pre-fix - Prefix used for this workstation
\par Workstation Index - 0 for first workstation, 2> for any other workstations
\par Next Invoice Number - Starting invoice number for this workstation
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24 Invoice Extra Fields
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Six boxes are provided here to enter contact details, such as telephone number, email address etc.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24 VAT Method
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {VAT can either be paid in the VAT period that the invoice was created (invoice date) or when the payment has been received. 

\par 
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ ProductConfig}}}{\fs16 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Manage Products 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par To add new products enter all the details and then click on the \lquote Add New\rquote  button.
\par 
\par A list of all entered products is shown on the lower part of the screen.
\par 
\par To edit previously entered products, simply click on the product and change any details. Then click on \lquote Update\rquote  button.
\par 
\par To delete previously entered products, simply click on the product, and then click on \lquote Delete\rquote  button.
\par 
\par }{\b Product Name }{\endash  Enter product name here, the name should be short and easy to remember
\par }{\b Description }{\endash  Enter product description here
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b Net Cost }{\endash  Net cost of product
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\b Vat % }{\endash  VAT Percentage for this product
\par }{\b No costing values }{\endash  Ticking this box will create a product with any pricing information
\par }{\b Zero Rated}{ \endash  Ticking this box will set the VAT Percent to indicate a \lquote Z\rquote  zero-rated VAT item
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ PrinterSetup}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Printer Setup
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par To change the printer for any of the sections, click on the down arrow on the right side of the box and select the correct printer. Then Click on the \lquote OK\rquote  button to save current settings.
\par 
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ Reports}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Reports
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par Each report can be displayed to the screen or the printer by selecting the \lquote Screen\rquote  or \lquote Printer\rquote  option.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24 VAT Report
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
Before printing the VAT report it is recommended that you print the VAT preview report. VAT reports are created in batches collecting all invoices before the cut-off date. To create a 
batch, enter the cut-off date (date the VAT period ends) and click on create batch. The new batch number will be put in the batch number box. Once a batch has been created clicking on the \lquote Print\rquote 
 button can print this batch. Old batches can be re-printed at a later date by entering the batch number and clicking on the \lquote Print\rquote  button.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24 Unpaid Invoice Report
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Simply click on the \lquote Print button\rquote 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24 VAT Preview
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Just like the VAT report except it makes no changes to the database.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24 Invoice Report
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Used to show invoices between two dates.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs24 Customer Export Report
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Generates a report that can be exported to an excel friendly format, which then can be used in mail merges etc.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ CustomerSearch}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Customer Search
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par To u
se this screen simply enter details using <enter> or <tab> key to move to the next box. If you are looking for an existing customer, the program will search on certain fields. I.e. Surname, Company Name, Line 1 of the address, Postcode, Contact Phone Numb
er. 
\par After the search the list of matches will be displayed in the list below the address details. To use an existing customer, simply click on the correct row in the list, and then click on the \lquote OK\rquote 
 button or double click on it. Once a customer has been selected all previous invoices, estimates, credit notes will be shown in the lists at the bottom of the screen. To edit a previous invoice or estimate click on it then click on the \lquote OK\rquote 
 button or just double click on it.
\par 
\par To display all estimates for all customers click on the \lquote Show all\rquote  button located near the estimate box.
\par 
\par }{\b Due date period }{\endash  This will default to the setting in the options screen, but can be changed for this customer only here.
\par }{\b One-off Customer }{\endash  Selecting this item will separate from other customers, for later use.
\par }{\b Find Location }{\endash  This button can be used if you have an Internet connection. It will open a link to a map web page.
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ Invoice}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Create Invoice 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par All customer details shown on this screen are not editable, to edit customer details click on \lquote Customer search\rquote  button to take you back to the previous screen
\par 
\par Invoice comments can be changed; this will not change the default invoice comments setup in the options screen
\par 
\par }{\b Invoice Number }{\endash  This number is generated when an invoice is created (printed) and will be blank unless editing a previously created invoice.
\par }{\b PO Number }{\endash  Customer reference number
\par }{\b Invoice Date }{\endash  Select the date for the invoice, this will default to toady\rquote s date.
\par }{\b Due Date }{\endash  This will be the invoice date + Number of days allowed for payment
\par }{\b Handling/Carriage }{\endash 
\par }{\b Amount Paid }{\endash  If a payment has been received when the invoice has been created a value can be entered here.
\par }{\b Don\rquote t print}{ \endash  Ticking this box will prevent an invoice being printed when clicking on the \lquote OK\rquote  button.
\par }{\b Account }{\endash  If a payment has been made select the account (payment method).
\par }{\b Copies }{\endash  Select the number of copies of the invoice that should be printed.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {To enter items on the invoice, simply enter details in the appropriate box. A product is always required. To enter
 long descriptions (multiple lines) click on the \lquote \'85\rquote 
 to the right of the description box. Another screen will appear; this screen is the approximate size of the space available on an invoice for the description field. Once finished editing the description click on the \lquote OK\rquote  button.
\par 
\par To discount the current value in the \lquote net amount\rquote  or \lquote Unit Cost\rquote  box right click and either click on the \lquote 5%\rquote  discount option or \lquote Other\rquote  to enter a discount value.
\par 
\par To complete the invoice click on the \lquote OK\rquote  button or if an estimate is required click on the \lquote Estimate\rquote  button.
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ PDAInterface}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart OLE_LINK1}PDA Interface 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par This {\*\bkmkend OLE_LINK1}screen shows all estimates that have been hot-synced from the PDA invoice software. Clicking on the \lquote Create Estimates\rquote  button will create all the estimates listed above. 
\par 
\par 
\par NOTE: It is important that customer details entered on the PDA are the same as the invoice software. When creating estimates it will try to match the details entered on the PDA by using the company name and the postcode. If it finds a 
match the software will ignore the details entered on the PDA and use the details entered in the PC system. If it is unable to find a match then the Details from the PDA will be used to create a customer in the PC system.
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ InvoiceEnquiry}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Invoice Enquiry 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par This screen allows you to view invoices using the following categories -
\par 
\par Unpaid Invoices
\par Paid Invoices
\par Overdue Unpaid Invoices
\par All Invoices
\par 
\par Overdue invoices will show in red background.
\par 
\par Once an invoice has been selected the following actions can be preformed \endash 
\par }{\b Show Invoice }{\endash  Shows the select invoice using the invoice screen.
\par }{\b Print statement }{\endash  Prints a statement for the selected customer. Statements show all outstanding invoices for that customer.
\par }{\b Enter payment }{\endash  This button will open the enter payment screen and display the selected invoice/
\par 
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ CreditNote}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Credit Note 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par This screen allows you to issue credit note against existing invoices.
\par 
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ Payment}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Payment screen
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par Payments can be made against invoice on this screen by entering the invoice number then the value and clicking on \lquote Add Payment\rquote  
\par 
\par NOTE: Before entering the payment, you must ensure the payment date is correct because there is no way to adjust payments after they have been made.
\par 
\par 
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ AccountConfig}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Manage Accounts
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par This screen allows you to configure different payment methods i.e. Cheque, Cash.
\par 
\par 
\par \page }{\cs16\fs16\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cs16\super #}{ HandlingSetup}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s2\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\widctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Handling Config
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par This screen allows different default handling values to be set-up.
\par 
\par 
\par \page 
\par }}